

<div id="badges"><!-- pkgdown markup -->
<a href="https://CRAN.R-project.org/web/checks/check_results_port4me.html"><img border="0" src="https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/port4me" alt="CRAN check status"/></a>       
</div>

# port4me: Get the Same, Personal, Free 'TCP' Port over and over 

The **port4me** tool:

-   finds a free TCP port in \[1024,65535\] that the user can open

-   is designed to work in multi-user environments

-   gives different users, different ports

-   gives the user the same port over time with high probability

-   gives different ports for different software tools

-   requires no configuration

-   can be reproduced perfectly on all operating systems and in all
    common programming languages

## Introduction

There are many tools to identify a free TCP port, where most of them
return a random port. Although it works technically, it might add a fair
bit of friction if a new random port number has to be entered by the
user each time they need to use a specific tool.

In contrast, **port4me** attempts, with high probability, to provide the
user with the same port each time, even when used on different days. It
achieves this by scanning the same deterministic, pseudo-random sequence
of ports and return the first free port detected. Each user gets their
own random port sequence, lowering the risk for any two users to request
the same port. The randomness is initiated with a random seed that is a
function of the user’s name (`USER`), and, optionally, the name of the
software where we use the port.

The **port4me** algorithm can be implemented in most known programming
languages, producing perfectly reproducible sequencing regardless of
implementation language.

## A quick introduction

Assuming we’re logged in as user `alice`, calling `port4me::port4me()`
without arguments gives us a free port:

    Sys.info()[["user"]]

    ## [1] "alice"

    port4me::port4me()

    ## [1] 30845

As we will see later, each user on the system is likely to get their own
unique port. Because of this, it can be used to specifying a port that
some tool should use, e.g.

    shiny::runApp(port = port4me::port4me())

As long as this port is available, `alice` will always get the same port
across R sessions and over time. For example, if they return next week
and retry, it’s likely they still get:

    port4me::port4me()

    ## [1] 30845

    port4me::port4me()

    ## [1] 30845

However, if port 30845 is already occupied, the next port in the
pseudo-random sequence is considered, e.g.

    port4me::port4me()

    ## [1] 19654

To see the first five ports scanned, run:

    port4me::port4me(list = 5)

    ## [1] 30845 19654 32310 63992 15273

## User-specific, deterministic, pseudo-random port sequence

This random sequence is initiated by a random seed that can be set via
the hashcode of a seed string. By default, it is based on the name of
the current user (e.g. environment variable `$USER`). For example, when
user `bob` uses the `port4me` tool, they see another set of ports being
scanned:

    Sys.info()[["user"]]

    ## [1] "bob"

    port4me::port4me(list = 5)

    ## [1] 54242  4930 42139 14723 55707

For testing and demonstration purposes, one can emulate another user by
specifying argument `user`, e.g.

    Sys.info()[["user"]]

    ## [1] "alice"

    port4me::port4me()

    ## [1] 30845

    port4me::port4me(user = "bob")

    ## [1] 54242

    port4me::port4me(user = "carol")

    ## [1] 34307

## Different ports for different software tools

Sometimes a user would like to use two, or more, ports at the same time,
e.g. two ports for two different Shiny apps. In such case, they can
specify argument `tool`, which results in a port sequence that is unique
to both the user and the tool. For example,

    port4me::port4me()

    ## [1] 30845

    port4me::port4me("myapp")

    ## [1] 55578

    port4me::port4me("demo")

    ## [1] 32273

This allows us to do:

    shiny::runApp(appDir = "myapp", port = port4me::port4me("myapp"))

and

    shiny::runApp(appDir = "demo", port = port4me::port4me("demo"))

## Avoid using ports commonly used elsewhere

Since there is a limited set of ports available (1024-65535), there is
always a risk that another process occupies any given port. The more
users there are on the same machine, the higher the risk is for this to
happen. If a user is unlucky, they might experience this frequently. For
example, `alice` might find that the first port (30845) works only one
out 10 times, the second port (19654) works 99 out 100 times, and the
third one (32310) works rarely. If so, they might choose to exclude the
ports that are most likely to be used by specifying them as a
comma-separated values via option `--exclude`, e.g.

    port4me::port4me(exclude = c(30845, 32310))

    [1] 19654

An alternative to specify them via a command-line option, is to specify
them via environment variable `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE`, e.g.

    {alice}$ PORT4ME_EXCLUDE=30845,32310 R
    ...
    > port4me::port4me()
    [1] 19654

To set this permanently, append:

    ## port4me customization
    ## https://github.com/HenrikBengtsson/port4me
    PORT4ME_EXCLUDE=30845,32310
    export PORT4ME_EXCLUDE

to the shell startup script, e.g. `~/.bashrc`. Alternatively, it can be
set specifically for R in `~/.Renviron` as:

    ## port4me customization
    ## https://github.com/HenrikBengtsson/port4me
    PORT4ME_EXCLUDE=30845,32310

This increases the chances for the user to end up with the same port
over time, which is convenient, because then they can reuse the same
call, which is available in the command-line history, each time without
having to change the port parameter.

The environment variable `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE` is intended to be used by the
individual user. To specify a set of ports to be excluded regardless of
user, set `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE`. For example, the systems
administrator, can choose to exclude an additional set of ports by
adding the following to file `/etc/profile.d/port4me.sh`:

    ## port4me: always exclude commonly used ports
    ## https://github.com/HenrikBengtsson/port4me

    PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE=

    ## MySQL
    PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE=$PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE,3306

    ## ZeroMQ
    PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE=$PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE,5670

    ## Redis
    PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE=$PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE,6379

    ## Jupyter
    PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE=$PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE,8888

    export PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE

In addition to ports excluded via above mechanisms, **port4me** excludes
ports that are considered unsafe by the Chrome and Firefox web browsers.
This behavior can be controlled by environment variable
`PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_UNSAFE`, which defaults to `{chrome},{firefox}`. Token
`{chrome}` expands to the value of `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_UNSAFE_CHROME`,
which defaults to [the set of ports that Chrome
blocks](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src.git/+/refs/heads/master/net/base/port_util.cc)
and `{firefox}` expands to to the value of
`PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_UNSAFE_FIREFOX`, which defaults to [the set of ports
that Firefox
blocks](https://www-archive.mozilla.org/projects/netlib/portbanning#portlist).

Analogously to excluding a set of ports, one can limit the range of
ports to be scanned by specifying command-line argument `include`, e.g.

    port4me::port4me(include = c(2000:2123, 4321, 10000:10999))

    ## [1] 10451

where the default corresponds to `include = 1024:65535`. Analogously to
`exclude`, `include` can be specified via environment variables
`PORT4ME_INCLUDE` and `PORT4ME_INCLUDE_SITE`.

## Scan a predefined set of ports before pseudo-random ones

In addition to scanning the user-specific, pseudo-random port sequence
for a free port, it is possible to also consider a predefined set of
ports prior to the random ones by specifying command-line argument
`prepend`, e.g.

    port4me::port4me(prepend = c(4321, 11001), list = 5)

    ## [1]  4321 11001 30845 19654 32310

An alternative to specify them via a command-line option, is to specify
them via environment variable `PORT4ME_PREPEND`, e.g.

    {alice}$ PORT4ME_PREPEND=4321,11001 R
    ...
    > port4me::port4me(list = 5)
    [1]  4321 11001 30845 19654 32310

The environment variable `PORT4ME_PREPEND` is intended to be used by the
individual user. To specify a set of ports to be prepended regardless of
user, set `PORT4ME_PREPEND_SITE`.

## Installation

To install the R **port4me** package, do:

    install.packages("port4me")

To install the development version, do:

    remotes::install_github("HenrikBengtsson/port4me", subdir = "r")

To try it out, call:

    port4me::port4me("jupyter-notebook")

    ## [1] 29525

or

    $ Rscript -e port4me::port4me jupyter-notebook
    29525

## The port4me Algorithm

### Requirements

-   It should be possible to implement the algorithm using 32-bit
    *unsigned* integer arithmetic. One must not assume that the largest
    represented integer can exceed 2<sup>32</sup> − 1.

-   The pseudo-randomized port sequence should sample ports uniformly
    over \[1024,65535\].

-   At a minimum, it should be possible to implement the algorithm in
    vanilla Sh\*, Csh, Bash, C, C++, Fortran, Lua, Python, R, and Ruby,
    with *no* need for add-on packages beyond what is available from
    their core distribution. (\*) Shells that do not support integer
    arithmetic may use tools such as `expr`, `dc`, `bc`, and `awk` for
    these calculations.

-   All programming languages should produce the exact same
    pseudo-random port sequences given the same random seed.

-   The implementations should be written such that they work also when
    sourced, or copy’and’pasted into source code elsewhere, e.g. in R
    and Python scripts.

-   The identified, free port should be outputted to the standard output
    (stdout) as digits only, without any prefix or suffix symbols.

-   The user should be able to exclude a pre-defined set of ports by
    specifying environment variable `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE`,
    e.g. `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE=8080,4321`.

-   The system administrator should be able to specify a pre-defined set
    of ports to be excluded by specifying environment variable
    `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE`, e.g. `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE=8080,4321`. This
    works complementary to `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE`.

-   The user should be able to skip a certain number of random ports at
    their will by specifying environment variable `PORT4ME_SKIP`,
    e.g. `PORT4ME_SKIP=5`. The default is to not skip, which corresponds
    to `PORT4ME_SKIP=0`. Skipping should apply *after* ports are
    excluding by `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE` and `PORT4ME_EXCLUDE_SITE`.

-   New implementations should perfectly reproduce the port sequences
    produced by already existing implementations.

### Design

-   A *[Linear congruential generator
    (LCG)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_congruential_generator)*
    will be used to generate the pseudo-random port sequence

    -   the next seed, *s*<sub>*n* + 1</sub> is calculated based on the
        current seed *s*<sub>*n*</sub> and parameters
        *a*, *c*, *m* &gt; 1 as
        *s*<sub>*n* + 1</sub> = (*a*\**s*<sub>*n*</sub>+*c*)%*m*

    -   the LCG algorithm must not assume that the current LCG seed is
        within \[0,*m*−1\], i.e. it should apply modulo *m* on the seed
        first to avoid integer overflow

    -   the LCG algorithm may produce the same output seed as input
        seed, which may happen when the seed is
        *s*<sub>*n*</sub> = *m* − (*a*−*c*). To avoid this resulting in
        a constant LCG stream, increment the seed by one and recalculate
        whenever this happens

    -   LCG parameters should be *m* = 2<sup>16</sup> + 1, *a* = 75, and
        *c* = 74 (“ZX81”)

        -   this requires only 32-bit integer arithmetic, because
            *m* &lt; 2<sup>32</sup>

        -   if the initial seed is *s*<sub>0</sub> = *m* − (*a*−*c*),
            which here is *m* − 1 = 2<sup>16</sup>, then the next LCG
            seed will be the same, which is then handled by the above
            increment-by-one workaround

-   A *32-bit integer string hashcode* will be used to generate an
    integer in \[0,2<sup>32</sup>−1\] from an ASCII string with any
    number of characters. The hashcode algorithm is based on the Java
    hashcode algorithm, but uses unsigned 32-bit integers in
    \[0,2<sup>32</sup>−1\], instead of signed ones in
    \[−2<sup>31</sup>,2<sup>31</sup>−1\]

-   The string hashcode is used as the initial LCG seed:

    -   the LCG seed should be in \[0,*m*−1\]

    -   given hashcode *h*, we can generate the initial LCG seed as *h*
        modulo *m*

## Installation
R package port4me is available on [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=port4me) and can be installed in R as:
```r
install.packages("port4me")
```


### Pre-release version

To install the pre-release version that is available in Git branch `develop` on GitHub, use:
```r
remotes::install_github("HenrikBengtsson/port4me", ref="develop")
```
This will install the package from source.  

<!-- pkgdown-drop-below -->

